If you're not respecting the ABI, you're one segfault away from chaos.

Current transitional function ABI
---------------------------------

This document describes the ABI while the compiler is being reduced for the
Atari 2600. Fixed parameters and named automatic locals use callee-owned
symbols. Expression temporaries, caller argument-evaluation scratch, and
variadic argument blobs still use the existing software stack for now.

Function returns
----------------

Every legal function return is one of:

* `void`: no returned value;
* one-byte integer: A contains the value and X is unspecified;
* two-byte little-endian integer: A contains the low byte and X the high byte;
* 16-bit pointer: A contains the low byte and X the high byte.

Functions may not return aggregates, arrays, floating-point values, big-endian
integers, or any value larger than two bytes. The compiler rejects those return
types at the declaration or definition. There is no caller-owned return-slot
ABI or `return_value` metadata mode.

Inside a value-returning function, `$$` is the source-level return object. It is
a hidden callee-owned symbol. `return expr;` writes the converted value to
`$$`. At the common epilogue, the compiler loads the high byte into X when
present, loads the low byte into A, and executes RTS.

Before an ordinary direct call:

; reserve one caller-owned scratch area large enough to evaluate the largest
; fixed parameter, if any
; evaluate fixed arguments left-to-right
; copy each converted argument into its callee-owned parameter symbol
; save caller frame pointer on HARDWARE stack
lda fp+1
pha
lda fp
pha
; call target
jsr _foo
; A:X now contains the return value when the function is non-void
; restore caller frame pointer without destroying A:X
; A is temporarily moved through Y; X is left untouched
tay
pla
sta fp
pla
sta fp+1
tya
; consume or copy A:X as required by the enclosing expression
; release caller parameter-evaluation scratch, if any

The current expression engine may reserve caller-local scratch space and copy
A:X into it after a call. That scratch is not part of the callee ABI and is a
transitional consequence of retaining the old stack-based expression engine.

Function prologue:

; transfer current sp to fp
lda sp+1
sta fp+1
lda sp
sta fp
; named automatic locals already have fixed symbols
; allocate compiler-only transitional workspace with pushN only if required

Function epilogue for a value return:

; release any compiler-only transitional workspace
; load high byte of $$ into X for a two-byte result
; load low byte of $$ into A
rts

Function epilogue for void:

; release any compiler-only transitional workspace
rts

Reset/startup:

; initialize both sp and fp to the initial argument-stack base
; because the argument stack grows upward, startup should seed them at __stack_start

A, P, X, and Y are caller-clobbered across ordinary function calls, except that
A and possibly X carry the function result on return. Callers must assume a
callee may freely overwrite all registers before producing that result unless
an API explicitly documents stronger guarantees.

NOTE: If a special-case wrapper needs to preserve both A and P, and wants P
exactly as it was, it must pull P last:

PHP      ; save status
PHA      ; save A
...
PLA      ; restore A (and flags get set from A)
PLP      ; restore original status flags, including N/Z


Direct fixed-parameter ABI
--------------------------

Every non-void, non-ellipsis parameter of a directly named function has a
callee-owned symbol. Ordinary parameters use BSS-backed absolute symbols;
parameters explicitly assigned to a zero-page memory region use zero-page
symbols. The caller evaluates arguments from left to right and writes each
converted value to the corresponding symbol before JSR.

A direct call therefore places no fixed parameter bytes on the software stack.
The caller may temporarily reserve one reusable evaluation scratch area sized
to the largest fixed parameter. That scratch belongs to the caller and is not
part of the callee ABI.

Every function body owns one fixed activation record containing its parameters,
automatic locals, and return object when present. No function may be active
twice. The compiler rejects direct and mutual cycles inside a translation unit,
and the linker rejects cycles completed across objects.

Plain function pointers cannot encode the addresses of callee-owned parameter
symbols. Taking the address of a parameterized direct function is therefore a
compile-time error. Zero-parameter function pointers remain on the old indirect
call path for now and are not part of the intended final VCS subset.


Variadic call ABI
-----------------

Variadic arguments are passed as a raw byte blob plus two hidden metadata slots.
The caller lays out a variadic call frame in this order:

1. raw variadic blob bytes
2. hidden `__va_args` pointer to the first blob byte
3. hidden `__va_arg_bytes` total byte count
4. no fixed-parameter bytes; fixed parameters are callee-owned symbols

The raw variadic blob is packed left-to-right in source argument order with no
padding and no alignment holes. Each variadic argument contributes exactly its
actual runtime storage size. There are no C-style default promotions for
variadic arguments.

Each variadic argument's bytes are copied in that argument's own storage order.
The final VCS language is little-endian only, but arbitrary-endian and wide
legacy argument types have not yet been removed from the transitional compiler.

Inside a variadic callee, the compiler synthesizes two reserved implementation
locals:

- `__va_args`: `void *` pointing at the first raw variadic byte
- `__va_arg_bytes`: pointer-sized integer metadata holding the total blob size

These names are reserved and may not be used by user declarations. Variadic
functions are not part of the intended minimal VCS subset and will be removed in
a later controlled slice.
